KEP to support limiting the quota check to only resources declared in ClusterQueue (#8396)
kubernetes-sigs/kueue: keps/7513-quota-check/README.md

   `excludeResourcePrefixes` whenever a new resource appears that is not on `ClusterQueue`.

4. **Most users care about a small set of resources**: In practice, most Kueue deployments
   are primarily concerned with managing a small, well-known set of resources (CPU, memory,
   and specific accelerators like GPUs), not all the resources that can appear in pod specs.

The current exclude-based approach assumes users want to manage all resources by default and
opt-out of specific ones. For many deployments, an include-based approach that assumes users
want to manage only specific resources would be more appropriate and simpler to operate.

### Goals

- Provide a single configuration option to specify how Kueue should manage the resources for quota purposes
- Deprecate existing `excludeResourcePrefixes` API configuration
- Reduce the operational burden for cluster administrators in environments with dynamic
  resource injection

### Non-Goals

- Modifying workload admission logic beyond resource filtering
- Impact on TAS calculation for resources placement

## Proposal

Add a new configuration option `resources.quotaCheck` to the Kueue Configuration API.

> When this field is set with `OnlyDeclared` value, only resources declared in the `ClusterQueue` are taken into account for quota admission decisions, any resources not listed in the `ClusterQueue` are ignored. When the field has value `All`, which would be the default, all the resources defined in the Pod are taken into account for quota admission decisions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a new configuration option `resources.quotaCheck` to the Kueue Configuration API.
When this field is set with `OnlyDeclared` value, only resources declared in the `ClusterQueue` are taken into account for quota admission decisions. 

When the field has value `All`, which is the default reflecting the current semantics, all the resources 
defined in the Workload's PodTemplate are taken into account for quota admission decisions.
```

### User Stories

#### Story 1: Focus on GPU management

As a training platform operator, I primarily care about managing GPU quota across teams.
While pods request CPU and memory, I want to focus on tracking and limiting GPU usage.

With `quotaCheck`, I can configure:
```yaml
resources:
  quotaCheck: "OnlyDeclared"
```

Then the clusterQueue could be configured like the following:
```yaml
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: ClusterQueue
metadata:
  name: "cluster-queue"
spec:
  namespaceSelector: {} # match all.
  resourceGroups:
  - coveredResources: ["nvidia.com/gpu"]
    flavors:
    - name: "nvidia"
      resources:
      - name: "nvidia.com/gpu"
        nominalQuota: 10
```

This allows me to manage only GPU resources without worrying about other resources that
might appear in pod specifications.

### Risks and Mitigations

**Risk**: Users might get confused on what is being managed and what is not.

**Mitigation**:
- Provide logging with resources that are being skipped.

## Design Details

### API Changes

Add a new type and field to the Kueue `Resources`:

```go
// QuotaCheckStrategy determines how Kueue checks resources against quota
// during admission.

> // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=All;OnlyDeclared

Reviewer: I think these are ignored, aren't they, because this is Configuration API rather than CRD. So we will not have the generated valiadation rules.

type QuotaCheckStrategy string

const (
	// QuotaCheckAll means all resources in Pod requests are checked against quota,
	// except those matching ExcludeResourcePrefixes.

> 	QuotaCheckAll QuotaCheckStrategy = "All"

Reviewer 2: > For example, the preexisting excludeResourcePrefixes:

AFAIK, we didn't have TAS (since v0.9) when we introduce `excludeResource` feauture (since v0.7).
So, we didn't have any reason to distinguish between quota and node because we didn't care Node capacity at all before incoming TAS.

However, as you know, today, Kueue TAS carefully care Node capabilities. And actually, even if Kueue ignores some resources on quota checks, TAS will check all resources. There is a recognition gap from the user PoV, I think.

For sure, as you mentioned, we can describe any semantics in API comments, but it would be better to make an effort for an intuitive API field name.

> 	QuotaCheckAll QuotaCheckStrategy = "All"

Reviewer 2: > So, QuotaCheck is just a check corresponding to "phase one", so it reads naturally to me. Maybe QuotaReservationStrategy is a bit more, and could also cover handling of TAS, but I think this is out of scope here.

Good point, that sounds reasonable to me. I agree with QuotaCheckStrategy here. Thank you for pointing that out.

> Regarding the enum value names, I slightly prefer BlockUndeclared / PermitUndeclared to avoid the redundant resources, but it is only slight preference. We could explain in the documentation text this is about declaration in the ClusterQueue. Alternatively: BlockUndeclaredInCQ, PermitUndeclaredInCQ, wdyt?

`BlockUndeclared` sounds good to me, but I'd propose an alternative `IgnoreUndeclared` instead of `PermitUndeclared`. IIUC, even if we specify `PermitUndeclared`, flavor assigner doesn't do `Permit` action, and it just ignores evaluation, right? Let me know when my understanding is not correct.

> 	QuotaCheckAll QuotaCheckStrategy = "All"

Reviewer: Yes, IgnoreUndeclared sounds better

	// QuotaCheckOnlyDeclared means only resources declared in the ClusterQueue's
	// coveredResources are checked against quota. Undeclared resources are ignored.
	QuotaCheckOnlyDeclared QuotaCheckStrategy = "OnlyDeclared"
)

type Resources struct {
    // ...
    // QuotaCheck determines which resources are considered during quota admission.
    // +kubebuilder:default="All"
    // +optional

>     QuotaCheck QuotaCheckStrategy `json:"quotaCheck,omitempty"`

Author: Not sure I got the suggestion proposed here.

}
```

### Feature Gate

This feature is gated behind the `QuotaCheck` feature gate.

- **Alpha**: The feature gate is disabled by default. Users must explicitly enable
  it to use `quotaCheck: "OnlyDeclared"`. When the gate is disabled, the `quotaCheck`
  configuration field is ignored and the behavior is equivalent to `All`.
- **Beta**: The feature gate is enabled by default.
- **GA**: The feature gate is locked to enabled and cannot be disabled.

### Implementation Details

The flavor assigner logic will be modified in the [`findFlavorForPodSets`](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/fe64c96e32130b15e9e5898ffaa1e145761d49d8/pkg/scheduler/flavorassigner/flavorassigner.go#L751) method to:

1. If `quotaCheck` is set with value `OnlyDeclared`:
   - Only resources that match resources defined in the `ClusterQueue` are used for
     quota check.
   - Any resources defined in the Pod that are not defined in the `ClusterQueue` will
     be skipped for flavor admission.
   - Any resources defined in the `ClusterQueue` that are not in the Pod will be

>      skipped for quota check.

Author: @amy My idea was the following:
   - Any resources defined in the worload that are not defined in the `ClusterQueue` will
     be **skipped**.
   - Any resources defined in the `ClusterQueue` that are not in the Pod will be
     **skipped**.

So, if we have this:
quotaCheck: IgnoreUndeclared
cohort-1, CQ-A: CPU, Memory
cohort-1, CQ-B: GPU

I was assuming we would get:
CQ-A: if we submit a GPU workload, it will not be blocked, GPU it's ignored.
CQ-B: if we submit a CPU/Memory workload, it will not be blocked, CPU/Memory is ignored.

Let me know if you have any concerns with this approach I'm suggesting.
